

 - [ref](https://archive.ph/bWyso)

### For Software Engineers, the AI Reckoning Is Already Here

Artificial intelligence has changed computer programming more than it has any other profession, and coders are transforming right along with it.

By Mark Milian    
July 16, 2026 at 9:00 AM UTC

Boris Cherny is at the office on a Wednesday afternoon in San Francisco tapping away at his laptop. He’s working but isn’t quite sure what to call the work he’s doing. Six months ago he would have called it coding.

This, however, is something different entirely. Instead of writing in any of the coding languages he’s spent a lifetime practicing, Cherny is typing into a text box in plain English to a bunch of Claudes. He tells one of these artificial intelligence assistants to edit some code it wrote earlier, then switches to a second tab to instruct another Claude to translate a different set of code from one programming language to another, then switches to yet another tab to instruct another Claude to fix a problem the humans on his team are encountering with the system they use to share and test code.

Cherny is using Claude Code, the software he created and runs at Anthropic PBC. In the year since he started the project, his entire profession has changed. The solitary ritual of entering a mental flow state and writing code for hours is being replaced by a sort of simulated partnership with an army of chatbots. Whereas programmers once romanticized their craft as akin to chiseling a sculpture or writing a sonnet, AI coders say theirs is like playing StarCraft. Today’s most advanced models from Anthropic and OpenAI produce high-quality code, and as much as half of all programming is now computer-generated. Four out of five engineers at Amazon Web Services use AI. Google says AI writes three-quarters of its code. Spotify Technology SA has said its top software engineers haven’t handwritten code since December. They use Claude Code too.

Not every profession will undergo the same transformation in quite the same way, but if you want an idea of how AI might affect your work someday, you should understand what it’s doing to the discipline of the people who created it. Compared with the old way, this method of working can be immensely productive. A certain type of engineer — one with a broad understanding of how software is constructed, a hyperactive mind and maybe some slightly manic tendencies — is thriving.

AI coding has reinvigorated the startup scene; given rise to phenomena such as OpenClaw, a startlingly popular piece of software for deploying AI agents; and revived enthusiasm for hackathons, where programmers go to test ideas, pick up new techniques or lock eyes with a potential business partner. It’s also been a gutting experience for thousands of engineers, many of whom have recently lost their jobs after following the conventional path for what was supposed to be a stable, well-paying career. A current of anxiety is coursing through software engineers everywhere. Recognizing the job is changing and watching mass layoffs hollow out their industry, they’re trying to figure out how to become what tech bosses and venture capitalists refer to as 10X engineers — and not end up as Uber drivers.

Claire Le Goues, a computer science professor at Carnegie Mellon University, says she frequently finds herself having to reassure nervous students that there’s still work out there for them. “That anxiety is legitimate,” she says. “It is not as easy to get a job as it once was.” To help students navigate this new reality, she’s assisting in an overhaul of the school’s curriculum, which will emphasize the fundamentals of how software systems fit together, rather than specific coding languages, and include a new class on the use of AI coding agents. “I’ve not participated in this dramatic of a course redesign, ever,” Le Goues says.

In part because practically every engineer is now using Claude Code or one of its analogues, Cherny seems to be popping up in every coder’s X or podcast feed. People try to parse his musings for clues about what capabilities might be coming to Claude or tips on how to be a better AI coder. It’s hard to keep up. Cherny’s team is presently engaged in an arms race with its counterpart at OpenAI, which is constantly improving its rival software, Codex. He says he hasn’t written a single line of code since November and sees this as just another step in the evolution of software development, not a rupture with the past. “Programming has just always changed,” he says, his laptop cracked open slightly on the table, like a clamshell guarding a pearl, so his Claudes can continue working during the interview. “Now I feel like I have a jet pack. I can just build anything.”
Nobody really knows where things are going. When Cherny first put out Claude Code, in February 2025, it couldn’t be trusted to do programming on its own and went largely unnoticed. Discouraged, Cherny left that summer for a job at Cursor LLC, which makes a more conventional code editor. He lasted two weeks. Back at Anthropic, Cherny watched as each new model achieved remarkably greater competence and autonomy. He’d routinely challenge Claude on a programming technique, only to be convinced — in ego-shattering fashion — that Claude’s way was best. “I’ve stopped pointing stuff out,” he says. “I’ve found more and more that my opinions are wrong.”

For the first 150 years or so, programming was done mainly by punching holes into paper. The first punch cards were used in looms to tell them what patterns to make. A punched hole instructed the machine to weave the needle through a set of threads here; an unpunched spot meant don’t. Anything with a computer chip today — a laptop, phone, Kindle, ATM, electric toothbrush — works essentially the same way as those looms. Their transistors respond to an invisible code of ones and zeros, punch or no punch.

Because nobody wanted to spend all day tapping out “01100001” to make the letter “a,” the mathematician Grace Hopper in 1952 created one of the first software compilers. Called A-0, it could take math equations typed by a person and turn them into code the computer could understand. Hopper then went to work on another compiler that would let people write commands in English, and the software would do the work of translating the words into the machine’s language. (Before this, compiling was an aspect of people’s jobs.) Over the coming decades, thousands of programming languages emerged, each one designed to eliminate common annoyances, automate repetitive chores and make coders’ lives a little easier.

Cherny moved with his family to the US in 1995 from the former Soviet Union, where his grandfather once programmed punch cards for mainframes. He spent most of his adult life as a software engineer learning one programming language after another: Python, JavaScript, TypeScript, Rust, Swift. In 2017 he joined Meta Platforms Inc., where he rose to become lead of code quality and did a stint in Japan as tech lead of server architecture and infrastructure at Instagram, writing code to keep the app online while his colleagues in Silicon Valley were asleep.

Anthropic, which was founded in 2021 by a group of disaffected former OpenAI employees, identified a business opportunity in coding fairly early. The company trained its AI models on real-world databases of tangled code, with all their human imperfections, and worked with startups including Cursor to get them into the hands of programmers.

Cat Wu, head of product for Claude Code, had joined Cherny on the move to Cursor last year and shared the same sudden change of heart. At age 31, Wu has experienced a full tech career arc in the span of a decade: an internship at Google, software engineering jobs at a pair of startups, a partnership at a venture capital firm, an urge to get back into the game at Anthropic. What made her give up the comfort of venture capital to return to making software was that she could now do it without having to code herself. “I think I was an OK engineer, but I still remember just spending so much time debugging things,” she says. “I don’t miss it.”

As a partner at Index Ventures, Wu used Claude to scrape social media sites, analyzing posts for indications that promising talent might be leaving their jobs to start companies, or to determine which apps were gaining traction. She also had Claude compile dossiers on entrepreneurs in advance of meetings and keep logs of their communications — all very important but very mundane tasks. “There’s still so much toil in people’s day to day,” she says.

While Wu says Anthropic is focused on using Claude Code to help programmers become 10X engineers, part of the excitement around the product is how it empowers people who know nothing about coding to create software. If you subject yourself to reading far enough into your LinkedIn feed or get stuck talking to a bored dad at a barbecue, you may hear all about the apps they’ve vibe coded.
Some of the most Claude-pilled people in the Valley occupy the corner office. The heads of Meta, Shopify and Y Combinator are gushing about their hobby projects or contributing code directly to their companies’ apps. To ensure all personnel sufficiently match the boss’s exuberance, some teams set up leaderboards ranking employees by their AI usage. The people who do the budgets are less enthusiastic, however. Uber Technologies Inc. recently instituted a per-employee cap on AI spending after burning through the entire year’s budget by springtime. It’s been widely observed that leaderboards encourage employees to waste company resources with unnecessary AI use, and companies including Amazon.com Inc. and Meta have shut theirs down.

For the most part, though, chief executive officers are egging on their staff to embrace AI. It seems like every CEO with a technology department feels compelled to have an AI strategy, and that strategy often includes layoffs or hiring freezes. Annual employment growth for coders was 4.8% prior to the introduction of modern consumer AI tools; it’s essentially flatlined over the past few years, according to a Federal Reserve Board report in March.

While some companies appear to be correcting for the overhiring of the Covid-19 era and using AI as the fall guy, there are plenty of examples of corporate structures changing to accommodate new ways of working. This tends to involve flatter organizations with fewer managers, smaller teams of developers assigned to each part of a product, faster prototyping of ideas and a blending of job functions.
At Anthropic the expectation that everybody is at least a little bit of a coder has become endemic, and that mindset is beginning to infect much of the tech industry. “Everyone on the team codes,” Cherny says. “There’s no engineer that only does engineering. Everyone does engineering and design, or engineering and product.”

The AWS Builder Loft on San Francisco’s Market Street is a big cafeteria with faux-wood-topped tables and pastel-colored plastic chairs. On the afternoon of the OpenClaw Hack Day in late March, most seats are occupied by young people wearing T-shirts or hoodies in front of laptops, engaging with their AI companions. The room is weirdly quiet. Every so often someone rises to try to coax water out of a frustratingly complex dispenser. The machine requires you to wave your hand to select still, sparkling, hot or “ambient,” then hold your palm steady in front of another sensor to make it pour. Some people figure this out; others leave in defeat. No one seems quite sure what ambient means in the context of water.

OpenClaw, an AI assistant that can be installed on a computer, takes direction through text messages from your phone. It’s the fastest-growing open-source software of all time, and Nvidia Corp. CEO Jensen Huang has called it “the most important software release probably ever.” Over the next six hours, humans and chatbots brainstorm ideas for their Claws. The 50 projects span the gamut. Several attempt to address the security risks of giving an AI unfettered access to your personal computer. Others will read a user’s calendar and help prep them for meetings. One app called Where-is-my-kid promises to tell you where your kid is, by monitoring the camera on their laptop. A notable number of projects are designed to help engineers find jobs.

Eight finalists are selected to present to the room. “How many of you have a chief of staff?” Marvin Kaunda asks in a thick Belgian accent at the beginning of his demo. No one raises a hand. “There you go. That’s exactly why I built an AI chief of staff.” He describes how the bot can help someone prepare for a job interview and research the hiring manager. “Actually, I’m looking for a job, so I’m using him for that.” He is awarded first place and a pair of Apple AirPods. “What!” he shouts in disbelief, then approaches the emcee. “Can I give you a hug?”

The next day, Kaunda arrives late for an interview with Bloomberg Businessweek at Dolores Park Cafe, in the Mission neighborhood. He was fired two weeks earlier from his job as the sole software engineer at a startup incubator. As a result, he’s losing his work visa and will be forced to move back to Europe if he can’t find another job soon. He’s late because he was arranging for a friend to store his Apple monitor for him until he can find a way back to San Francisco. “I made my peace with it,” Kaunda says.
The 29-year-old recalls learning Python at university in Brussels and feeling no particular love for coding. “The two things that I find quite beautiful about life are creating and learning,” he says. “I found my medium to have those two things together. But maybe it could’ve been music.” After school he started a company in Brussels and a second one in Paris, by which point he was increasingly relying on AI. Using an early version of Cursor in 2023, he’d start writing a line of code, and the app would guess where he was going and fill in the rest. Sometimes he’d also ask ChatGPT for help and then paste the output into his code editor.

Last year, Kaunda applied for a job at ODF, the incubator in San Francisco. The firm was looking for someone to develop a chat app similar to Slack where the group’s entrepreneurs could collaborate and network. It was Kaunda’s ticket to Silicon Valley, and he built the whole thing in just a few months with Claude Code. ODF rolled it out across the firm, only to have it break on the first day. “Immediately I lost their trust,” he says. He spent the next week fixing the bugs.

The shifting ground under the feet of software engineers over the past few years has been a particular challenge for those early in their careers. The number of jobs for software developers in their 20s peaked in 2022, the same year ChatGPT was released, according to a study of US payroll data by researchers at Stanford University. As of last year the number of entry-level coding jobs is down almost 20% from late 2022.

A few days after our interview, Kaunda posted a video on X about his situation, saying he had the “heart to build” and offering to meet with anyone who might have a job for him. It helped him land 30 interviews that he packed into the remaining time on his visa. He ended up doing “work trials” at two startups, where he spent a day or two at their offices, but neither offered him a position. Most employers still want to see engineers hand-code during the hiring process, and Kaunda’s skills were rusty. “Being slow is a bad signal,” he says. On May 11, crestfallen, he moved back in with his mom in Brussels.

Before creating OpenClaw, Peter Steinberger was more or less retired. He grew up in Vöcklabruck, Austria, and spent the first few years of his career bouncing around coding jobs in Vienna, before creating a project called PSPDFKit in 2011. The idea was to make PDF files more capable and reliable — the kind of boring but technically ambitious endeavor programmers hold in high esteem. “I actually wrote software by hand like a caveman,” he says. Steinberger eventually assembled a team of almost 70 and took on the role of CEO before cashing out a decade later.

During the next few years, he lived the life you’d expect of a moneyed thirtysomething retiree, traveling and partying. He sat down at a computer again in April 2025, seduced by Claude. “I got a dopamine hit every time it worked,” he says. The result was OpenClaw, which was such a success that it contributed to a shortage of Mac minis and is driving a cottage industry of Claw installers who operate booths on the streets of China. Mark Zuckerberg and OpenAI’s Sam Altman both courted Steinberger, who eventually chose OpenAI. He’s now living part time in Vienna and London while hopping around the globe to speak at conferences and going back and forth to see his Codex teammates in San Francisco, where he’s in the process of moving. Steinberger is wearing a T-shirt, nerdy glasses and an earring in one ear when we meet at the cafe inside the OpenAI lobby. He grabs his backpack, and a wad of crumpled $20s falls from the front pocket. He says he struggles to keep track of which currency he needs on any given day.
Steinberger’s Codex techniques are widely admired online. He’s been known to use three monitors with 10 to 15 windows containing different AI agents working on different projects. He’s likened it to playing the computer game Factorio, where the player constructs a rocket factory on an alien planet and must tinker with and supervise myriad assembly lines. “You just go into this deep flow state where you forget time and space and everything, and you just think with the code,” he says. “I get the very same feeling now with agents.”

A big part of why Steinberger left his company in Vienna was that he’d grown tired of management. But he sees some parallels between his old job and modern software development. “When you work with a coding agent, it’s kind of like managing a team of very spiky individuals,” he says. Reflecting on his time as a CEO, Steinberger says it took him a while to learn to let employees accomplish a task in their own way, rather than trying to force his methods on them. “I can breathe down his neck and make him do it my way, but it’s going to be painful for me and for that person, and they will eventually quit,” he says. “Codex will not quit, but it will be similarly painful.”

OpenAI’s first real experiments in autonomous coding were in 2021, the same year Anthropic was founded. The company worked with Microsoft Corp., its main backer, to incorporate the technology into GitHub Copilot, which would plug into a code editor and autocomplete lines of code as you wrote. It very quickly became an essential tool for programmers. But while Anthropic made code a core focus from the beginning, OpenAI was building image and video generation systems, a scientific research platform, a web browser, consumer electronics, a short-lived social network. When Claude Code arrived, OpenAI was caught flat-footed.

Over the past year, OpenAI shuttered projects, restructured management teams and established Codex as one of its two main priorities, says Greg Brockman, the company’s president and co-founder. (The other is “building your personal assistant,” he says. ChatGPT is in that bucket.) “Where we’re headed is almost everyone becoming a manager of agents,” Brockman says.

OpenAI’s focus on coding has intensified the competition with Anthropic. But the reality is that many coders use both companies’ tools. Some prefer sketching out how to tackle a project with Claude and then feeding that plan to Codex to build. Others will do all the initial coding in Claude, design in Google’s Gemini and have Codex repair the inevitable flaws.

New advancements in AI systems are showing up every week, enabling humans to be even further removed from the line-by-line process. Cherny and Steinberger have recently shifted their default approach when they sit down at a keyboard to what’s known as writing loops. Instead of prompting an agent to build a feature or fix a specific problem and then supervising each step of the work, they hand the AI an ambitious goal — build this, test it, fix the bugs, optimize the code, document what you built, keep testing until there are no apparent bugs — and let a team of agents work for hours without interruption. In the background, AI is prompting other AI agents, over and over, to get the job done.

There are risks to taking their hands off the wheel for too long. As code bases grow in size and complexity, the agents can start to lose the plot. Humans who haven’t been paying attention to how the software was built can find it difficult to diagnose and resolve problems. Plus, a developer’s programming muscles can atrophy without regular exercise, which can be a problem if they ever need to write code the old-fashioned way again.

For now there’s a strong perception that AI is making developers more productive. The optimist’s view is that it will lead to an explosion of software that solves any little inconvenience people encounter in their daily digital life. This could require more developers than ever. Another possibility is that, even as we use more software, we end up needing drastically fewer software specialists. Many CEOs have already come to this conclusion. Jack Dorsey cut 4,000 jobs from his company Block Inc., Salesforce’s Marc Benioff cut about 4,000 too, and Zuckerberg dismissed 8,000 — each of them citing AI as a major factor.
Measuring the productivity impact of this new way of working with any precision is tricky, though. In early 2025, before AI coding agents were widely in use, the research organization METR asked engineers to guess how productive they’d be with AI, then spend several hours coding manually or with agents. Researchers observing their output found that the developers overestimated their productivity and were in fact slower on average than peers who were still coding the old way. Just because something felt more efficient didn’t mean it actually was. Later that year the researchers observed what appeared to be substantial productivity gains coming from the latest AI models. But when they attempted to run the experiment again, they couldn’t find enough people to participate. Most were unwilling to code by hand.
Pavel Rodionov arrives at the Palace Hotel in San Francisco after a day of work at Amazon, where he’s a software development engineer. He’s in his early 30s, has a wisp of brown hair pushed to the side of his face and faint blemishes on his cheek. He’s wearing a light gray sweatshirt and occasionally pokes his hands into his belly as if to hide them in a sweatshirt pocket, even though his hoodie doesn’t have pockets. At the hotel bar he orders a virgin mojito, and he’s carded. Rodionov chuckles, his cheeks red, and presents his driver’s license.

Rodionov grew up in Nizhny Novgorod, a city of about 1.2 million people on the Volga River east of Moscow. He has a conspicuous Russian accent, but his English is nearly impeccable. He apologizes for it anyway. Rodionov started coding when he was 15 and built Android apps as an undergrad to make some spending money. He did outsourcing work as he was earning a master’s degree in computer science, then did a stint at Intel Corp. before joining Amazon.

Rodionov doesn’t write code from scratch anymore, but he still reads almost everything his AI agents produce and sometimes manually fixes their errors. The output from an agent is only as good as the instructions that go into it, so complex projects require a human mind with a deep understanding of the software’s foundation and a general idea of where cracks might be forming. Even still, Rodionov finds it hard to believe how much of his work can be outsourced to AI. As just about everyone in the industry agrees, this shift happened in November with the release of a vastly more capable coding model called Claude Opus 4.5. “It feels like it was ages ago,” he says. “Some people say it’s tough to live in the history books.”

For many programmers who are out of work, it’s like Detroit in the 1960s, just before automation wiped out hundreds of thousands of factory jobs. For Rodionov, Silicon Valley is Florence during the Renaissance. There’s a mysticism, he says, to living alongside his coding heroes. “I don’t believe it’s going to cut all the jobs,” he says. “We have a lot of opportunity to do bigger and better stuff.” He remains gainfully employed but attends hackathons to stay close to the action and practice his pitching.

The night before, Rodionov had participated in an event called Claude for Technical Founders. It was hosted in Palo Alto at a venture capital firm’s office, a space with gray-and-yellow carpet and bright fluorescent lighting that looks like a car insurance agency from the ’90s. Rodionov’s project was called Outpace.ai, a sort of dashboard showing the location of tech jobs. After he’d recruited a team, their first step was to run the idea by Claude. The chatbot helped them validate that the concept was viable, select the most efficient coding languages to use, figure out the right datasets to pull from the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, sort out the software’s architecture, plan each phase of its development, design how the heat map should look and set criteria for success. (“A non-technical person watching the demo says ‘that’s cool’ within 30 seconds,” Claude said.)

With the blueprint in hand, Rodionov opened a new Claude Code window, pointed it to the document and asked it to get to work. When he was the one writing the code, he’d sometimes forget a bracket or a quotation mark, which would break the whole program; then he’d have to go hunting for the missing symbol. Now that’s Claude’s problem. The original name of Rodionov’s app was Job Market Shift Map. His collaborator, Khoa Le, came up with Outpace.ai. In the demo, Le referred to it as a “career copilot for the AI transition.” They didn’t win.

The next day, sitting outside a Blue Bottle Coffee shop in Oakland, Le recounts the somewhat unusual circumstances that brought him to the hackathon. He isn’t a coder. He studied economics and communication at the University of California at Davis and went into a career in data analytics, first at Morgan Stanley and then a succession of tech startups. Le currently works in the analytics department at a startup that makes software for real estate agents. He spends a lot of time in Excel.

Le, who’s 36, has long harbored ambitions of starting his own company. He saw an opening a couple of years ago while helping organize his daughter’s first birthday party. His wife, a corporate event planner, asked him to rent a backdrop for photographs. She walked him through the way she finds vendors by searching hashtags on Instagram, exchanging contracts over Google Docs and paying through Zelle. Le thought he could streamline the whole process by building an online marketplace.

He had no idea how to do that, so he spent what little time he had between work and family obligations taking a free online coding course. “It was like an eight-hour-long YouTube video,” he says. “It took me a whole month just to complete it.” For the next year he tried different coding platforms for beginners, and he pasted lots of code snippets that he found on the internet or generated with ChatGPT to glue together a functional prototype.

Last year a friend introduced Le to Claude Code. “I tested it, and I was like, ‘Holy shit.’ ” He bought the $100-a-month plan and can now deliver a feature that used to take weeks or months in a few hours. Claude is his software engineering team, his executive assistant and his board of directors. “Literally, I created a chat where I said, ‘Hey, you guys are my board. Imagine this is a legit company,’” he says. Now he takes orders from Claudes pretending to be Altman, Zuckerberg, Elon Musk and other tech luminaries.
Le hasn’t achieved his dream of creating a billion-dollar software business, but his website, Backdrop, has signed up more than two dozen caterers, videographers and other vendors in the Bay Area and grossed $7,000. “Modest numbers,” he acknowledges, “but it seems like there’s potential.”

While he still doesn’t consider himself a coder, he’s convinced that the year he spent learning the fundamentals was essential to his ability to use Claude Code effectively. “I went down the hard path of ‘let me learn how to code,’ ” he says. “In hindsight it was so beneficial. Now I can look at things and read the code and understand what’s happening.

“And if I don’t, I can just ask Claude, ‘What is this thing doing?’ ”

Last updated...   
7/21/2026  
Russell's gardening early morning   
99 today
